# Wrapping Up

## Congratulations - you got _juiced_. 
We took a pretty dry experience and gave it a _real_ good juicing. Nice job! Play around with it, change values, toggle things on and off. Find the feel that you like the most. 

## Takeaways, Tips and Tricks. 
Here's some thoughts you can take with you after all that:

### **Every action gets a reaction** 
Any time the player interacts with the game, they should get _some_ sort of response back. Even when a player can't perform that action in the moment, you can reinforce this audio and visual cues. 

### **Stack effects**
Even in this simple game our jump alone got squashed, stretched, a faster fall, a landing impact and some sound. That's all from one button press for one event!

When you layer responses you get to speak to multiple aspects of an interaction at once and make it feel multi-dimensional. Multiple things come together to become a fully-formed _event_.

### **Tiny effects can go a long way** 
Don't underestimate the power of what a lot of little effects can do. Hitstops on bullet contact are visually perceptible but tangible in the player's _felt_ experience. 

### **Prioritize effect intensity by importance**
Our death screenshake is a _much_ bigger deal than our shoot screenshake, as it should be. The choice you make about what effects to use and when should reflect a hierarchy of what you want the player to notice.

Big moments should get big effects, small moments should get more subtle ones. 

### **Don't be afraid to juice early**
The _extremely_ practical and sensible approach to building your game is to do so in a lo-fi way as you iron it out. Then later you can decide to polish or Juice it. But adding Juice also helps set the bar of where you want the experience to be and informs how things feel when interacted with. 

As with prioritizing effects on importance, prioritize your Juice timeline based on how central the mechanic or interaction is. 

### **Use restraint and contrast to keep feedback clear**
It _is_ possible to throw too much Juice at a player. If there is too much going on Kinetically or with Feedback, the player's experience is getting muddled instead of clarified. 

After all, the whole point of this is to enhance the feeling of actions and responses. Too much is, well, too much!

### **Pick fun and feel over realism.** 
Falling faster than you rise isn't what happens in real life. But it almost _feels_ better in a game. Huge bullets are just more fun. 

You can always start with something that feels "realistic" but don't get too attached to keeping it there. 

### **Sound is juice too.** 
Simple as that. Don't forget it!

## Read the ancient texts

The **[More Resources appendix](26-appendix-more-resources.md)** points to some of the best to ever do it on the subject. 

## 🍎 🍉 🍊 🍋 🍍 🥝 🫐 🍇

### [← Step 18 · 4.1.1 — 🔊 Sound](18-sound.md) | [Table of Contents](00-contents.md) | [Credits & Thanks →](18.2-credits.md)
